Questions
and
Answers
Office of Transportation and Air Quality
EPA-420-F-23-014
June 2023
Tailpipe Greenhouse Gas Emissions
from aTypical Passenger Vehicle
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) developed this fact
sheet to answer common questions about greenhouse gas emissions
from passenger vehicles. This fact sheet provides emission rates and
calculations consistent with EPA’s regulatory work.
How much tailpipe carbon dioxide (CO2) is created from
burning one gallon of fuel?
The amount of CO2 created from burning one gallon of fuel depends on the amount of
carbon in the fuel. Typically, more than 99% of the carbon in a fuel is emitted as CO2
when the fuel is burned. Very small amounts are emitted as hydrocarbons and carbon
monoxide, which are converted to CO2 relatively quickly in the atmosphere. Carbon
content varies by fuel, and some variation within each type of fuel is normal. EPA and
other agencies use the following average carbon content values to estimate CO2 emissions:
CO2 Emissions from a gallon of gasoline: 8,887 grams CO2 /gallon1
CO2 Emissions from a gallon of diesel: 10,180 grams CO2 /gallon2
Diesel creates about 15% more CO2 per gallon. However, many vehicles that use
diesel fuel achieve higher fuel economy than similar vehicles that use gasoline, which
generally offsets the higher carbon content of diesel fuel.
How can burning one gallon of gasoline produce 8,887 grams
(approximately 20 pounds) of tailpipe carbon, when one gallon of
gasoline weighs only about six pounds?
Most of the weight of the CO2 doesn’t come from the gasoline itself, but the oxygen
in the air. When gasoline burns, the carbon and hydrogen separate. The hydrogen
combines with oxygen to form water (H2O), and carbon combines with oxygen to
form carbon dioxide (CO2). Visit fueleconomy.gov for more details, including
the calculations.
1 This gasoline factor is from a regulation establishing GHG standards for model year 2017-2025 vehicles
(77 FR 62773, October 15, 2012).
2 This diesel factor is from the calculations that vehicle manufacturers use to measure fuel economy
(40 C.F.R 600.113).
Questions
and
Answers
2
How much tailpipe carbon dioxide (CO2) is emitted from driving
one mile?
The average passenger vehicle emits about 400 grams of CO2 per mile. The average fuel economy
for all vehicles on the road today is 22.2 miles per gallon.3 The majority of vehicles run on gasoline,
and every gallon of gasoline creates about 8,887 grams of CO2 when burned. Therefore, the
average vehicle when driving one mile has tailpipe CO2 emissions of about:
Electric vehicles (EVs) have zero tailpipe emissions.
What is the average annual carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions of a
typical passenger vehicle?
A typical passenger vehicle emits about 4.6 metric tons of CO2 per year. This number can vary
based on a vehicle’s fuel, fuel economy, and the number of miles driven per year. The average
vehicle on the road today has a fuel economy of about 22.2 miles per gallon (MPG) and drives
around 11,500 miles per year.4 Every gallon of gasoline burned creates about 8,887 grams of CO2,
and there are one million grams per metric ton. Therefore, the average gasoline vehicle over a year
of driving has tailpipe CO2 emissions of about5:
EPA uses this to compare CO2 emissions from other sources to emissions from passenger vehicles.
For example, an energy efficiency program that reduces greenhouse gas emissions by 4,600 metric
tons of CO2 per year has the same impact as removing 1,000 vehicles from the road.
Are there other sources of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from
a vehicle?
In addition to CO2, automobiles using gasoline produce methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O)
from the tailpipe and all vehicles can emit hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) from leaking air conditioners.
For gasoline vehicles, the emissions of HFCs are small in comparison to CO2; however, the impact
of these emissions can be important because they have a higher global warming potential (GWP)
than CO2.
3 Federal Highway Administration Highway Statistics 2020, data for calendar year 2019. Data for 2020 was not used
due to the impacts of the COVID-19 outbreak. The average passenger vehicle fuel economy is expected to increase
over time because of greenhouse gas and fuel economy standards developed in coordination between EPA, DOT,
and California.
4 Federal Highway Administration Highway Statistics 2020.
5 This calculation provides a simple way to determine the average annual CO2 emissions from a passenger vehicle.
Anyone that needs a more detailed approach should use the EPA’s Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator (MOVES)
model. MOVES contains detailed data about the light duty fleet and driving patterns in the United States. Although
simplified, the calculated annual CO2 emissions above are consistent with analyses performed by EPA using MOVES.
CO2 emissions per mile = = = 400 grams
CO2 per gallon
MPG
8,887
22.2
CO2 emissions per mile = × miles = × 11,500 = 4.6 metric tons
CO2 per gallon
MPG
8,887
22.2
Questions
and
Answers
3
The GWP of a gas relates the impact of that gas relative to an equivalent amount of CO2. Using
GWP, the impact of various GHGs can be directly compared using a common metric. This metric
is expressed in units of carbon dioxide equivalent, written as CO2e. Multiplying the amount
of a GHG times the GWP of that GHG results in the amount of GHG in terms of CO2e. For
automotive-related gases, these GWPs are:
Greenhouse Gas Abbreviation Global Warming Potential6
Carbon Dioxide CO2 1
Methane CH4 25
Nitrous Oxide N2O 298
Air Conditioning Refrigerant HFC-134a 1,430
It is more difficult to estimate vehicle emissions of CH4, N2O, and HFCs than CO2. Emissions of
CH4 and N2O are dependent on the design of the gasoline engine and emission control system,
rather than fuel consumption per mile. The amount of HFC leakage from air conditioners is
dependent on system design, amount of use, and maintenance. On average, CO2 emissions are
95-99% of the total GHGs from a gasoline passenger vehicle, after accounting for the GWP of all
GHGs. The remaining 1-5% is CH4, N2O, and HFC emissions. EVs also emit a small amount of
GHGs due to air conditioner/HFC leakage.
What are the tailpipe emissions from a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle
(PHEV) or an electric vehicle (EV)? What about hydrogen fuel cell
vehicles (FCEV)?
Electric vehicles (EVs) have a battery instead of a gasoline tank, and an electric motor instead of
an internal combustion engine. EVs do not emit any tailpipe emissions. A fuel cell electric vehicle
(FCEV) operating on hydrogen will emit only water vapor. Calculating tailpipe emissions for
PHEVs is more complicated because they use both gasoline and electricity as fuel sources. When
operating on electricity only, a PHEV does not generate any tailpipe emissions. When a PHEV
is operating on gasoline only, it creates tailpipe emissions based on its gasoline fuel economy.
Tailpipe emissions for a PHEV operating on both electricity and gasoline cannot be calculated
without detailed information about how the specific PHEV operates. The overall tailpipe emissions
for a PHEV can vary significantly based on its battery capacity, how it is driven, and how often it is
charged. For more information, see the My Plug-In Hybrid calculator.
6 These 100-year time horizon GWP values are from the 2007 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
Fourth Assessment Report. The IPCC released updated values in the Fifth Assessment Report (2014), however
international reporting guidelines still use the values shown here.
Questions
and
Answers
4
Are there any greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with the
use of my vehicle other than what comes out of the tailpipe?
Driving gasoline vehicles results in tailpipe GHG emissions. Producing and distributing the gasoline
used to power your vehicle also creates GHGs. For example, the production of gasoline requires
extracting oil from the ground, transporting it to a refinery, refining the oil into gasoline, and
transporting the gasoline to service stations. Each of these steps can produce additional GHGs.
Electric vehicles (EVs) have no tailpipe emissions; however, emissions are created during both the
production and distribution of the electricity used to fuel the vehicle. Visit the Beyond Tailpipe
Emissions calculator to estimate GHG emissions for an EV in your region of the country.
I thought my gasoline was blended with ethanol. Does that change
my tailpipe carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions?
Most of the gasoline sold in the U.S. is a mixture of gasoline and up to 10% ethanol (often referred
to as E10). The exact formulation of the gasoline in your vehicle will vary depending on season,
region in the U.S., and other factors. While your fuel economy when using an ethanol blend in
your vehicle will be slightly lower than when using gasoline without ethanol, the CO2 tailpipe
emissions per mile will be similar. This is because ethanol has less carbon per gallon than gasoline.
How does the EPA measure carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions
from vehicles?
EPA measures vehicle fuel economy and CO2 emissions using a set of standardized laboratory tests.
These tests were designed by EPA to mimic typical driving patterns. Both EPA and the Department
of Transportation use these values to ensure that manufacturers meet federal greenhouse gas and
corporate average fuel economy (CAFE) standards.
For every new vehicle, the test results are used to determine real world fuel economy and CO2
emissions. These adjusted results are used on the Fuel Economy and Environment Labels and on
Fueleconomy.gov.
Visit Testing at the National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory and Frequent Questions on
Fuel Economy Testing and Labeling for more information.
How can I find and compare carbon dioxide (CO2) emission rates for
specific vehicle models?
Visit Fueleconomy.gov and click on “Find a Car.” Select your vehicle of interest. From the vehicle
search results page, click on the “Energy and Environment” tab. A vehicle’s GHG emissions rate
(g/mile) and GHG rating (1-10 scale) can be found on that search results page.
When shopping at a dealership, check out tailpipe carbon dioxide (CO2) emission rates on vehicle
Fuel Economy and Environment Labels. The labels also feature a 1-to 10 Fuel Economy and GHG
rating to enable easy comparison shopping.
Questions
and
Answers
5
Where can I find information on the emissions of the transportation
sector as a whole?
Visit EPA’s Fast Facts on Transportation Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Pollution from
Transportation.
Annually EPA also publishes industry-wide data in the report, “Light-Duty Automotive
Technology, Carbon Dioxide Emissions, and Fuel Economy Trends.” This report analyzes trends in
fuel economy and CO2 emissions for new light duty vehicles from 1975 to the present.
Other useful sources include:
Beyond Tailpipe Emissions Calculator
Fueleconomy.gov
Greenhouse Gas Equivalencies Calculator
Green Vehicle Guide
Household Carbon Footprint Calculator
Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks
For additional information on calculating emissions of greenhouse gases, please contact
greenvehicles@epa.gov, or you can contact the OTAQ library for document information at:
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Office of Transportation and Air Quality
2000 Traverwood Drive Ann Arbor, MI 48105
734-214-4311 & 734-214-4434
E-mail: Group_AAlibrary@epa.gov
